README.md, before:

# Geoclide

The python package for geometric calculations in the three-dimentional Euclidian space

Mustapha Moulana  
[HYGEOS](https://hygeos.com/en/)

-----------------------------------------

## Installation
The installation can be performed using the following command:
```shell
$ pip install git+https://github.com/hygeos/geoclide.git
```

## Testing
Run the command `pytest tests/ -s -v` to check that everything is running correctly.

## Available classes/functions
| Class/Function | Type | Description |
| -------------- | ---- | ----------- |
| `Vector`| class | vector with x, y and z components |
| `Point` | class | point with x, y and z components |
| `Normal` | class | normal with x, y and z components |
| `Ray` | class | the ray: r(t) = o + t*d, with 'o' a Point, 'd' a vector and t ∈ [0,inf[ |
| `BBox` | class | Bounding box |
| `Sphere` | class | sphere object |
| `Triangle` | class | triangle object |
| `TriangleMesh` | class | triangle mesh object |
| `Transform` | class | transformation to translate and/or rotate every objects except a BBox |
| `calc_intersection` | Function | intersection test between a shape and a ray and returns dataset |
| `get_common_vertices` | Function | gives the vertices of BBox b1 which are common to another BBox b2 |
| `get_common_face` | Function | same as `get_common_vertices` but with faces |
| `dot` | Function | dot product (only vector or normal) |
| `cross` | Function | cross product (only vector or normal) |
| `normalize` | Function | normalize a vector/normal |
| `coordinate_system` | Function | from a vector v1 compute vectors v2 and v3 such that v1, v2 and v3 are unit vectors of an orthogonal coordinate system |
| `distance` | Function | compute the distance between 2 points |
| `face_forward` | Function | ensure a vector/normal is in the same hemipherical direction than another given vector/normal |
| `vmax` | Function | largest component value of the vector/point/normal |
| `vmin` | Function | smallest component value of the vector/point/normal |
| `vargmax` | Function | index of the vector/point/normal component with the largest value |
| `vargmin` | Function | index of the vector/point/normal component with the smallest value |
| `vabs` | Function | absolute value of each components of the vector/point/normal |
| `permute` | Function | permutes the vector/point/normal values according to the given indices |
| `clamp` | Function | clamp a value into the range [val_min, val_max] |
| `quadratic` | Function | resolve the quadratic polynomial: ax**2 + bx + c |
| `gamma_f32` | Function | gamma function from pbrt v3 |
| `gamma_f64` | Function | gamma function from pbrt v3 but in double precision |
| `get_inverse_tf` | Function | get the inverse transform from a another transform |
| `get_translate_tf` | Function | get the translate transfrom from a given vector |
| `get_scale_tf` | Function | get scale transform giving factors in x, y and z |
| `get_rotateX_tf` | Function | get the rotate (arount x axis) transform from scalar in degrees |
| `get_rotateY_tf` | Function | get the rotate (arount y axis) transform from scalar in degrees |
| `get_rotateZ_tf` | Function | get the rotate (arount z axis) transform from scalar in degrees |
| `get_rotate_tf` | Function | get the rotate transform around a given vector/normal |



## Examples
### Basic exemple
```python
>>> import geoclide as gc
>>> import numpy as np
>>> # Some basics
>>> p1 = gc.Point(0., 0., 0.) # create a point
>>> v1 = gc.normalize(gc.Vector(0.5, 0.5, 0.1)) # create a vector and normalize it
>>> v1
Vector(0.4082482904638631, 0.4082482904638631, 0.8164965809277261)
>>> # With a point and a vector we can create a ray
>>> r1 = gc.Ray(o=p1, d=v1)
>>> r1
r(t) = (0.0, 0.0, 0.0) + t*(0.4082482904638631, 0.4082482904638631, 0.8164965809277261) with t ∈ [0,inf[
>>> # Let's create a triangle mesh with 2 triangles
>>> # We have 4 vertices
>>> p0 = gc.Point(-5, -5, 0.)
>>> p1 = gc.Point(5, -5, 0.)
>>> p2 = gc.Point(-5, 5, 0.)
>>> p3 = gc.Point(5, 5, 0.)
>>> v = np.array([p0, p1, p2, p3], dtype=gc.Point)
>>> # Get the vertices indices of each triangle
>>> vid_t0 = np.array([0, 1, 2]) # the vertices indices of triangle 0
>>> vid_t1 = np.array([2, 3, 1]) # the vertices indices of triangle 1
>>> vi = np.concatenate((vid_t0, vid_t1)) # regroup everything
>>> # Here if we create the triangle mesh, it would be a square of dimension 10*10
>>> # centered at origin (0.,0.,0.) and parallel to the xy plane
>>> # We can create a transformation to translate and rotate it
>>> translate = gc.get_translate_tf(gc.Vector(2.5, 0., 0.)) # translation of 2.5 in x axis
>>> rotate = gc.get_rotateY_tf(-90.) # rotation of -90 degrees around the y axis
>>> oTw = translate*rotate # object to world transformation to apply to the triangle mesh
>>> tri_mesh = gc.TriangleMesh(vi, v, oTw=oTw) # create the triangle mesh
>>> ds = gc.calc_intersection(tri_mesh, r1) # see if the ray r1 intersect the triangle mesh
>>> ds
<xarray.Dataset> Size: 801B
Dimensions:          (xyz: 3, nvertices: 4, ntriangles: 2, p0p1p2: 3, dim_0: 4,
                      dim_1: 4)
Coordinates:
  * xyz              (xyz) int64 24B 0 1 2
Dimensions without coordinates: nvertices, ntriangles, p0p1p2, dim_0, dim_1
Data variables: (12/14)
    is_intersection  bool 1B True
    o                (xyz) float64 24B 0.0 0.0 0.0
    d                (xyz) float64 24B 0.7001 0.7001 0.14
    mint             int64 8B 0
    maxt             float64 8B inf
    v                (nvertices, xyz) float64 96B -5.0 -5.0 0.0 ... 5.0 5.0 0.0
    ...               ...
    wTo_mInv         (dim_0, dim_1) float64 128B 6.123e-17 0.0 -1.0 ... 0.0 1.0
    oTw_m            (dim_0, dim_1) float64 128B 6.123e-17 0.0 -1.0 ... 0.0 1.0
    oTw_mInv         (dim_0, dim_1) float64 128B 6.123e-17 0.0 1.0 ... 0.0 1.0
    thit             float64 8B 3.571
    phit             (xyz) float64 24B 2.5 2.5 0.5
    nhit             (xyz) float64 24B 1.0 0.0 -8.882e-17
Attributes:
    shape:       TriangleMesh
    ntriangles:  2
    nvertices:   4
    date:        2025-01-27
    version:     1.0.0
>>> # Here there is intersection, see more detail on intersection point phit
>>> ds['phit']
<xarray.DataArray 'phit' (xyz: 3)> Size: 24B
array([2.5, 2.5, 0.5])
Coordinates:
  * xyz      (xyz) int64 24B 0 1 2
Attributes:
    type:         Point
    description:  the x, y and z components of the intersection point
>>> # We can convert it into a point object
>>> phit = gc.Point(ds['phit'].values)
>>> phit
Point(2.5, 2.5, 0.5)
```

### Example for remote sensing applications
```python
import geoclide as gc
import math

# Find satellite x an y positions knowing its altitude and its viewing zenith and azimuth angles
vza = 45. # viewing zenith angle in degrees
vaa = 45. # viewing azimuth angle in degrees
sat_altitude = 700.  # satellite altitude in kilometers
origin = gc.Point(0., 0., 0.) # origin is the viewer seeing the satellite
# The vaa start from north going clockwise.
# Let's assume that in our coordinate system the x axis is in the north direction
# Then theta (zenith) angle = vza and phi (azimuth) angle = -vaa
theta = vza
phi = -vaa

# Find the direction from ground to the satellite
dir_to_sat = gc.Vector(0., 0., 1.)  # start facing nadir
dir_to_sat = gc.get_rotateY_tf(theta)[dir_to_sat] # perform a rotation around y axis to consider vza
dir_to_sat = gc.get_rotateZ_tf(phi)[dir_to_sat]   # then a rotation around z axis to consider vaa
ray = gc.Ray(o=origin, d=dir_to_sat) # create the ray, starting from origin going in dir_to_sat direction

# Here without considering the sphericity of the earth
b1 = gc.BBox(p1=gc.Point(-math.inf, -math.inf, 0.), p2=gc.Point(math.inf, math.inf, sat_altitude))
ds_pp = gc.calc_intersection(b1, ray) # return an xarray dataset

# Here with the consideration of the sphericity of the earth
earth_radius = 6378. # the equatorial earth radius in kilometers
oTw = gc.get_translate_tf(gc.Vector(0., 0., -earth_radius))
sphere_sat_alti = gc.Sphere(radius=earth_radius+sat_altitude, oTw=oTw)  # apply oTw to move the sphere center to earth center
ds_sp = gc.calc_intersection(sphere_sat_alti, ray) # return an xarray dataset

print ("Satellite position (pp case) :", ds_pp['phit'].values)
print ("Satellite position (sp case) ", ds_sp['phit'].values)
```

Commit message:

Add description in pyproject and add pypi install in README installation section

README.md, after:

# Geoclide

[![image](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/geoclide.svg)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/geoclide)
[![image](https://pepy.tech/badge/geoclide)](https://pepy.tech/project/geoclide)

The python package for geometric calculations in the three-dimentional Euclidian space

Mustapha Moulana  
[HYGEOS](https://hygeos.com/en/)

-----------------------------------------

## Installation
The installation can be performed using one of the following commands:
```shell
$ pip install geoclide
```
```shell
$ pip install git+https://github.com/hygeos/geoclide.git
```

## Testing
Run the command `pytest tests/ -s -v` to check that everything is running correctly.

## Available classes/functions
| Class/Function | Type | Description |
| -------------- | ---- | ----------- |
| `Vector`| Class | vector with x, y and z components |
| `Point` | Class | point with x, y and z components |
| `Normal` | Class | normal with x, y and z components |
| `Ray` | Class | the ray: r(t) = o + t*d, with 'o' a Point, 'd' a vector and t ∈ [0,inf[ |
| `BBox` | Class | Bounding box |
| `Sphere` | Class | sphere object |
| `Triangle` | Class | triangle object |
| `TriangleMesh` | Class | triangle mesh object |
| `Transform` | Class | transformation to translate and/or rotate every objects except a BBox |
| `calc_intersection` | Function | intersection test between a shape and a ray and returns dataset |
| `get_common_vertices` | Function | gives the vertices of BBox b1 which are common to another BBox b2 |
| `get_common_face` | Function | same as `get_common_vertices` but with faces |
| `dot` | Function | dot product (only vector or normal) |
| `cross` | Function | cross product (only vector or normal) |
| `normalize` | Function | normalize a vector/normal |
| `coordinate_system` | Function | from a vector v1 compute vectors v2 and v3 such that v1, v2 and v3 are unit vectors of an orthogonal coordinate system |
| `distance` | Function | compute the distance between 2 points |
| `face_forward` | Function | ensure a vector/normal is in the same hemipherical direction than another given vector/normal |
| `vmax` | Function | largest component value of the vector/point/normal |
| `vmin` | Function | smallest component value of the vector/point/normal |
| `vargmax` | Function | index of the vector/point/normal component with the largest value |
| `vargmin` | Function | index of the vector/point/normal component with the smallest value |
| `vabs` | Function | absolute value of each components of the vector/point/normal |
| `permute` | Function | permutes the vector/point/normal values according to the given indices |
| `clamp` | Function | clamp a value into the range [val_min, val_max] |
| `quadratic` | Function | resolve the quadratic polynomial: ax**2 + bx + c |
| `gamma_f32` | Function | gamma function from pbrt v3 |
| `gamma_f64` | Function | gamma function from pbrt v3 but in double precision |
| `get_inverse_tf` | Function | get the inverse transform from a another transform |
| `get_translate_tf` | Function | get the translate transfrom from a given vector |
| `get_scale_tf` | Function | get scale transform giving factors in x, y and z |
| `get_rotateX_tf` | Function | get the rotate (arount x axis) transform from scalar in degrees |
| `get_rotateY_tf` | Function | get the rotate (arount y axis) transform from scalar in degrees |
| `get_rotateZ_tf` | Function | get the rotate (arount z axis) transform from scalar in degrees |
| `get_rotate_tf` | Function | get the rotate transform around a given vector/normal |



## Examples
### Basic exemple
```python
>>> import geoclide as gc
>>> import numpy as np
>>> # Some basics
>>> p1 = gc.Point(0., 0., 0.) # create a point
>>> v1 = gc.normalize(gc.Vector(0.5, 0.5, 0.1)) # create a vector and normalize it
>>> v1
Vector(0.4082482904638631, 0.4082482904638631, 0.8164965809277261)
>>> # With a point and a vector we can create a ray
>>> r1 = gc.Ray(o=p1, d=v1)
>>> r1
r(t) = (0.0, 0.0, 0.0) + t*(0.4082482904638631, 0.4082482904638631, 0.8164965809277261) with t ∈ [0,inf[
>>> # Let's create a triangle mesh with 2 triangles
>>> # We have 4 vertices
>>> p0 = gc.Point(-5, -5, 0.)
>>> p1 = gc.Point(5, -5, 0.)
>>> p2 = gc.Point(-5, 5, 0.)
>>> p3 = gc.Point(5, 5, 0.)
>>> v = np.array([p0, p1, p2, p3], dtype=gc.Point)
>>> # Get the vertices indices of each triangle
>>> vid_t0 = np.array([0, 1, 2]) # the vertices indices of triangle 0
>>> vid_t1 = np.array([2, 3, 1]) # the vertices indices of triangle 1
>>> vi = np.concatenate((vid_t0, vid_t1)) # regroup everything
>>> # Here if we create the triangle mesh, it would be a square of dimension 10*10
>>> # centered at origin (0.,0.,0.) and parallel to the xy plane
>>> # We can create a transformation to translate and rotate it
>>> translate = gc.get_translate_tf(gc.Vector(2.5, 0., 0.)) # translation of 2.5 in x axis
>>> rotate = gc.get_rotateY_tf(-90.) # rotation of -90 degrees around the y axis
>>> oTw = translate*rotate # object to world transformation to apply to the triangle mesh
>>> tri_mesh = gc.TriangleMesh(vi, v, oTw=oTw) # create the triangle mesh
>>> ds = gc.calc_intersection(tri_mesh, r1) # see if the ray r1 intersect the triangle mesh
>>> ds
<xarray.Dataset> Size: 801B
Dimensions:          (xyz: 3, nvertices: 4, ntriangles: 2, p0p1p2: 3, dim_0: 4,
                      dim_1: 4)
Coordinates:
  * xyz              (xyz) int64 24B 0 1 2
Dimensions without coordinates: nvertices, ntriangles, p0p1p2, dim_0, dim_1
Data variables: (12/14)
    is_intersection  bool 1B True
    o                (xyz) float64 24B 0.0 0.0 0.0
    d                (xyz) float64 24B 0.7001 0.7001 0.14
    mint             int64 8B 0
    maxt             float64 8B inf
    v                (nvertices, xyz) float64 96B -5.0 -5.0 0.0 ... 5.0 5.0 0.0
    ...               ...
    wTo_mInv         (dim_0, dim_1) float64 128B 6.123e-17 0.0 -1.0 ... 0.0 1.0
    oTw_m            (dim_0, dim_1) float64 128B 6.123e-17 0.0 -1.0 ... 0.0 1.0
    oTw_mInv         (dim_0, dim_1) float64 128B 6.123e-17 0.0 1.0 ... 0.0 1.0
    thit             float64 8B 3.571
    phit             (xyz) float64 24B 2.5 2.5 0.5
    nhit             (xyz) float64 24B 1.0 0.0 -8.882e-17
Attributes:
    shape:       TriangleMesh
    ntriangles:  2
    nvertices:   4
    date:        2025-01-27
    version:     1.0.0
>>> # Here there is intersection, see more detail on intersection point phit
>>> ds['phit']
<xarray.DataArray 'phit' (xyz: 3)> Size: 24B
array([2.5, 2.5, 0.5])
Coordinates:
  * xyz      (xyz) int64 24B 0 1 2
Attributes:
    type:         Point
    description:  the x, y and z components of the intersection point
>>> # We can convert it into a point object
>>> phit = gc.Point(ds['phit'].values)
>>> phit
Point(2.5, 2.5, 0.5)
```

### Example for remote sensing applications
```python
import geoclide as gc
import math

# Find satellite x an y positions knowing its altitude and its viewing zenith and azimuth angles
vza = 45. # viewing zenith angle in degrees
vaa = 45. # viewing azimuth angle in degrees
sat_altitude = 700.  # satellite altitude in kilometers
origin = gc.Point(0., 0., 0.) # origin is the viewer seeing the satellite
# The vaa start from north going clockwise.
# Let's assume that in our coordinate system the x axis is in the north direction
# Then theta (zenith) angle = vza and phi (azimuth) angle = -vaa
theta = vza
phi = -vaa

# Find the direction from ground to the satellite
dir_to_sat = gc.Vector(0., 0., 1.)  # start facing nadir
dir_to_sat = gc.get_rotateY_tf(theta)[dir_to_sat] # perform a rotation around y axis to consider vza
dir_to_sat = gc.get_rotateZ_tf(phi)[dir_to_sat]   # then a rotation around z axis to consider vaa
ray = gc.Ray(o=origin, d=dir_to_sat) # create the ray, starting from origin going in dir_to_sat direction

# Here without considering the sphericity of the earth
b1 = gc.BBox(p1=gc.Point(-math.inf, -math.inf, 0.), p2=gc.Point(math.inf, math.inf, sat_altitude))
ds_pp = gc.calc_intersection(b1, ray) # return an xarray dataset

# Here with the consideration of the sphericity of the earth
earth_radius = 6378. # the equatorial earth radius in kilometers
oTw = gc.get_translate_tf(gc.Vector(0., 0., -earth_radius))
sphere_sat_alti = gc.Sphere(radius=earth_radius+sat_altitude, oTw=oTw)  # apply oTw to move the sphere center to earth center
ds_sp = gc.calc_intersection(sphere_sat_alti, ray) # return an xarray dataset

print ("Satellite position (pp case) :", ds_pp['phit'].values)
print ("Satellite position (sp case) ", ds_sp['phit'].values)
```
